# Practice writing questions

These are questions that I think may come up in the exam (or something close). Questions were not given to me beforehand.

Four main points to study (from HP):  
1. signal transduction pathways; feedback loops, specific examples  
2. alternative interpretations for why methylation might not be the only player  
3. epigenetics/methylation details and history of the field  
4. interaction between genetics for evolutionary outcomes


#### Practice questions

1. **Describe how a signal (like temperature) is translated to a physiological response, maintenance of homeostasis, and epigenetic changes.**

*Sensing and relaying the environmental signal (like temperature): signal transduction pathways*


*Physiological response at a cellular level and maintenance of homeostasis.*


*Potential epigenetic changes due to the above physiological response.*  



DNA methylation patterning is dynamic in response to environmental stress or new conditions/environment (Putnam et al 2016, Dimond and Roberts 2019, Dixon et al 2018, Liew et al 2018).

2. **Describe the interactions between genetics and epigenetics, and the consequences for evolutionary outcomes. Explain the 'inherited gene regulation (IGR)' approach.**

The inherited gene regulation approach summarizes 'non-genetic' inheritance (NGI) and 'non-genetic' factors that alter genome activity and regulate gene expression, defined by three principles:  
1. 'non-genetic' factors are functionally interdependent with, rather than separate from, DNA sequence    
2. Mechanisms vary widely phylogenetically and operationally   
3. epigenetic elements are probabilistic, interactive regulatory factors and not deterministic 'epialleles' with defined genomic locations and effects.

Any NGI portion may be negative or positive. Methylation marks don't always mean a positive influence; especially if transmitted to offspring via germline.

*Epigenetic modifications are inherently genetic*  
Allelic variants and mutations can influence the genes that encode for the various enzymes involved in epigenetic pathways. And whether or not a methylation mark can depend on 1.) presence of CpG dinucleotides and the amount of CpG nucleotides in a genome can influence how much it is able to methylate (base composition), 2.) histone-modifying enzymes are recruited by transcription factors that can recognize DNA sequence motifs (location of target site matters). So this inherently also depends on the sequence available to methylate.  

*Widely diverse*

Difference in vertebrates and invertebrates: location and function of methylation, # of DMNT genes used (3 in mammalian vs. 5-12 in teleost fish), and erasure during germ cell development (paternal methylation conserved in zebrafish vs. erased in mammalians).

*Epigenetic mechanisms are facultative*

IGR mechanisms operate at larger genomic region scale - not nucleotide resolution (methylation marks altogether on a gene or promoter is important but an individual methylation mark on an exact nucleotide is usually irrelevant). 'Chromatin landscapes' are not generated by one mechanism alone: interplay of methylation, de-methylation on DNA and histones together. IGR patterning can be set over several generations; the effects of a grandparental organism can influence progeny several generations later.


3. **Describe the pathways involved in DNA methylation at a cellular level.**

DNA methylation refers to the addition of a methyl (CH3) group to a cytosine nucleotide to form 5-methyl-cytosine (5mc). Methylated cytosines usually occur in CpG dinucleotides and is carried out by several DNA methyltransferase enzymes (DNMTs). DNMT1 is responsible for maintenance of existing methylation marks, and DNMT3a/b function results in new (de novo) methylation. DMNTs (and histone methyl transferases - HMTs) receive a donor methyl group from the metabolite SAM. This pathway is energy intensive and requires folate and ATP for DMNT3s to add the methyl group to a cytosine. Removing a methylation can occur in either active or passive de-methylation. In active de-methylation, ten eleven translocation (TET) enzyme will use oxygen and alpha-ketoglutarate (aKG) metabolite to remove the methyl group and transform the cytosine to its original form. Passive de-methlation occurs when a methyl group is lost in several rounds of DNA replication and where DNMT1 does not maintain that mark. Because both DMNT and TET enzymes are metabolite-dependent, an organism needs to have enough energy from food and metabolic function to allocate to epigenetic processes.

In vertebrates, this functions like a transcription on and off switch, with DNA methylation located heavily on promoter regions and total methylation levels around 70-80%. In invertebrates, methylation patterns are spread out evenly across gene bodies with methylation levels ~16-18%, although variable across taxa in corals (Trigg et al 2021). Here methylation serves more as a gene expression regulatory mechanism and affects the choice of transcription initiation site rather than an on and off switch.mDNA methylation is a result of active transcription: higher expression levels will signal to the organism that more regulation is needed for that set of genes. Genes used more often and for daily function ("housekeeping genes") have historically higher methylation levels compared to those genes that aren't used as often or are environmentally inducible. This results in a bimodal distribution of CpG Observed/Expected values. Over time methylation causes hypermutation of cytosines to thymines, so when observing the number of CpG dinucleotides in a genome there will be a smaller CpG Observed/Expected value when historical methylation levels are high.

Once a methylation mark is set,  MBD proteins zinc-finger proteins

4. **Describe the history of the epigenetic field and starting theories on environmental epigenetics.**


5. **Classify three major issues of analysis and experiments moving forward in the field of epigenetics.**



History of the field:  
- rolling rock paper - ask danielle
